{{cpp/atomic/atomic_ref/title|fetch_add}}
{{cpp/atomic/atomic_ref/navbar}}
{{dcl begin}}
{{dcl h|Provided only when {{tt|T}} is an arithmetic type other than ''cv'' {{c/core|bool}} or a pointer-to-object type}}
{{dcla|constexpr=c++26|1=
value_type fetch_add( difference_type arg,
                      std::memory_order order =
                          std::memory_order_seq_cst ) const noexcept;
}}
{{dcl end}}

Atomically replaces the current value referenced by {{box|{{c/core|*}}{{rlpsi|/#ptr}}}} with the result of arithmetic addition of the value and {{c|arg}}. This operation is a read-modify-write operation. Memory is affected according to the value of {{c|order}}.

* For signed integral types, arithmetic is defined to use two’s complement representation. There are no undefined results.
* For floating-point types, the [[cpp/numeric/fenv|floating-point environment]] in effect may be different from the calling thread's floating-point environment. The operation need not be conform to the corresponding {{lc|std::numeric_limits}} traits but is encouraged to do so. If the result is not a representable value for its type, the result is unspecified but the operation otherwise has no undefined behavior.
* For pointer types, the result may be an undefined address, but the operation otherwise has no undefined behavior.
** If {{c/core|std::remove_pointer_t&lt;T&gt;}} is not a complete object type, the program is ill-formed.

{{cpp/enable if|{{c/core|std::is_const_v&lt;T&gt;}} is {{c|false}}}}.

===Parameters===
{{par begin}}
{{par|arg|the other argument of arithmetic addition}}
{{par|order|memory order constraints to enforce}}
{{par end}}

===Return value===
The value referenced by {{box|{{c/core|*}}{{rlpsi|/#ptr}}}}, immediately preceding the effects of this function.

===Example===
{{example}}

===Defect reports===
{{dr list begin}}
{{dr list item|wg=lwg|dr=3508|paper=P3323R1|std=C++20|before={{tt|fetch_add}} was meaningless for {{c/core|const T}}|after=constrained to accept only non-const {{tt|T}}}}
{{dr list end}}

{{langlinks|es|ja|zh}}