{{cpp/title|wctomb}}
{{cpp/string/multibyte/navbar}}
{{ddcl|header=cstdlib|
int wctomb( char* s, wchar_t wc );
}}

Converts a wide character {{c|wc}} to multibyte encoding and stores it (including any shift sequences) in the char array whose first element is pointed to by {{c|s}}. No more than {{c|MB_CUR_MAX}} characters are stored. The conversion is affected by the current locale's LC_CTYPE category.

If {{c|wc}} is the null character, the null byte is written to {{c|s}}, preceded by any shift sequences necessary to restore the initial shift state.

If {{c|s}} is a null pointer, resets the global conversion state and determines whether shift sequences are used.

===Parameters===
{{par begin}}
{{par|s|pointer to the character array for output}}
{{par|wc|wide character to convert}}
{{par end}}

===Return value===
If {{c|s}} is not a null pointer, returns the number of bytes that are contained in the multibyte representation of {{c|wc}} or {{c|-1}} if {{c|wc}} is not a valid character. 

If {{c|s}} is a null pointer, resets its internal conversion state to represent the initial shift state and returns {{c|0}} if the current multibyte encoding is not state-dependent (does not use shift sequences) or a non-zero value if the current multibyte encoding is state-dependent (uses shift sequences).

===Notes===
Each call to {{tt|wctomb}} updates the internal global conversion state (a static object of type {{lc|std::mbstate_t}}, only known to this function). If the multibyte encoding uses shift states, this function is not reentrant. In any case, multiple threads should not call {{tt|wctomb}} without synchronization: {{lc|std::wcrtomb}} may be used instead.

===Example===
{{example
|code=
#include &lt;clocale&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;
#include &lt;iomanip&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

void print_wide(const std::wstring&amp; wstr)
{
    bool shifts = std::wctomb(nullptr, 0); // reset the conversion state
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "shift sequences are " &lt;&lt; (shifts ? "" : "not" )
              &lt;&lt; " used\n" &lt;&lt; std::uppercase &lt;&lt; std::setfill('0');
    for (const wchar_t wc : wstr)
    {
        std::string mb(MB_CUR_MAX, '\0');
        const int ret = std::wctomb(&amp;mb[0], wc);
        const char* s = ret &gt; 1 ? "s" : "";
        std::cout &lt;&lt; "multibyte char '" &lt;&lt; mb &lt;&lt; "' is " &lt;&lt; ret
                  &lt;&lt; " byte" &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; ": [" &lt;&lt; std::hex;
        for (int i{0}; i != ret; ++i)
        {
            const int c = 0xFF &amp; mb[i];
            std::cout &lt;&lt; (i ? " " : "") &lt;&lt; std::setw(2) &lt;&lt; c;
        }
        std::cout &lt;&lt; "]\n" &lt;&lt; std::dec;
    }
}

int main()
{
    std::setlocale(LC_ALL, "en_US.utf8");
    // UTF-8 narrow multibyte encoding
    std::wstring wstr = L"z\u00df\u6c34\U0001d10b"; // or L"zß水𝄋"
    print_wide(wstr);
}
|output=
shift sequences are not used
multibyte char 'z' is 1 byte: [7A]
multibyte char 'ß' is 2 bytes: [C3 9F]
multibyte char '水' is 3 bytes: [E6 B0 B4]
multibyte char '𝄋' is 4 bytes: [F0 9D 84 8B]
}}

===See also===
{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/string/multibyte/dsc mbtowc}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/string/multibyte/dsc wcrtomb}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/locale/codecvt/dsc do_out}}
{{dsc see c|c/string/multibyte/wctomb}}
{{dsc end}}

{{langlinks|de|es|fr|it|ja|pt|ru|zh}}