{{cpp/thread/condition_variable/title|wait}}
{{cpp/thread/condition_variable/navbar}}

{{dcl begin}}
{{dcl|num=1|since=c++11|
void wait( std::unique_lock&lt;std::mutex&gt;&amp; lock );
}}
{{dcl|num=2|since=c++11|
template&lt; class Predicate &gt;
void wait( std::unique_lock&lt;std::mutex&gt;&amp; lock, Predicate pred );
}}
{{dcl end}}

{{tt|wait}} causes the current thread to block until the condition variable is notified or a spurious wakeup occurs. {{c|pred}} can be optionally provided to detect spurious wakeup.

@1@ Atomically calls {{c|lock.unlock()}} and blocks on {{c|*this}}.
@@ The thread will be unblocked when {{lc|notify_all()}} or {{lc|notify_one()}} is executed. It may also be unblocked spuriously.
@@ When unblocked, calls {{c|lock.lock()}} (possibly blocking on the lock), then returns.

@2@ Equivalent to
@@ {{c multi|
while (!pred())|
    wait(lock);
}}.
@@ This overload may be used to ignore spurious awakenings while waiting for a specific condition to become {{c/core|true}}.

Right after {{tt|wait}} returns, {{c|lock.owns_lock()}} is {{c|true}}, and {{c|lock.mutex()}} is locked by the calling thread. If these postconditions cannot be satisfied&lt;ref&gt;This can happen if the re-locking of the mutex throws an exception.&lt;/ref&gt;, calls {{lc|std::terminate}}.

If any of the following conditions is satisfied, the behavior is undefined:
* {{c|lock.owns_lock()}} is {{c|false}}.
* {{c|lock.mutex()}} is not locked by the calling thread.
* If some other threads are also waiting on {{c|*this}}, {{c|lock.mutex()}} is different from the mutex unlocked by the waiting functions ({{tt|wait}}, {{lc|wait_for}} and {{lc|wait_until}}) called on {{c|*this}} by those threads.

&lt;references/&gt;

===Parameters===
{{par begin}}
{{par|lock|an lock which must be locked by the calling thread}}
{{par|pred|the predicate to check whether the waiting can be completed}}
{{par hreq}}
{{par req named|Predicate|FunctionObject}}
{{par req|{{c|pred()}} must be a valid expression, and its type and value category must meet the {{named req|BooleanTestable}} requirements.}}
{{par end}}

===Exceptions===
@1@ Throws nothing.
@2@ Any exception thrown by {{c|pred}}.

===Notes===
{{cpp/thread/condition_variable/single total order note}}

===Example===
{{cpp/thread/condition_variable/example1|condition_variable}}

===Defect reports===
{{dr list begin}}
{{dr list item|wg=lwg|dr=2114|paper=P2167R3|std=C++11|before=convertibility to {{c/core|bool}} was too weak to reflect the expectation of implementations|after=requirements strengthened}}
{{dr list item|wg=lwg|dr=2135|std=C++11|before=the behavior was unclear if {{c|lock.lock()}} throws an exception|after=calls {{lc|std::terminate}} in this case}}
{{dr list end}}

===See also===
{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/thread/condition_variable/dsc wait_for|condition_variable}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/thread/condition_variable/dsc wait_until|condition_variable}}
{{dsc see c|c/thread/cnd_wait}}
{{dsc end}}

===External links===
{{eli|1=[https://devblogs.microsoft.com/oldnewthing/20180201-00/?p=97946 The Old New Thing] article: Spurious wake-ups in Win32 condition variables.}}

{{langlinks|de|es|fr|it|ja|pt|ru|zh}}