{{title|Current Status}}
{{cpp/version/navbar}}

'''Recent milestones: C++23 published, C++26 underway.'''

C++23 has been published, and work is now underway on C++26.

Starting in 2012, the committee has transitioned to a "decoupled" model where major pieces of work can progress independently from the Standard itself and be delivered in "feature branch" [[cpp/experimental|Technical Specifications]] ('''TS'''es). Vendors can choose to implement these, and the community can gain experience with the {{tt|std::experimental}} version of each feature. This lets us learn and adjust each feature's design based on experience before it is cast in stone when merged into the "trunk" C++ Standard itself. In the meantime, the Standard can be delivered on a more regular cadence with smaller and more predictable batches of features. This approach also helps C++ compilers to track the Standard more closely and add both the experimental and the draft-final C++ features in a more consistent order. The current schedule is in paper {{stddoc|P1000}}.

You can also visit [https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/ open-std.org] to get the latest C++ standards committee papers. Reading through those proposals, you can track the C++ developing trends and know how does a cool idea turned into the standard. However, those papers '''ARE NOT''' and also '''SHOULD NOT BE TREATED AS''' the standard documents.

===See also===
{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc see c|c/current_status|Current status|nomono=true}}
{{dsc end}}

{{langlinks|ar|cs|de|es|fr|it|ja|ko|pl|pt|ru|tr|zh}}