{{title|Useful resources}}
{{cpp/navbar}}

===Standard C++ Foundation===
* [https://isocpp.org/ isocpp.org] — Non-profit hub for C++ news, articles, and events.
:* [https://isocpp.org/faq C++ FAQ] — Unified FAQ by the Standard C++ Foundation.
:* [https://lists.isocpp.org/mailman/listinfo.cgi Mailing lists] — The official public mailing lists.

===C++ FAQs===
* [https://www.stroustrup.com/bs_faq.html Bjarne Stroustrup FAQ] — Answers to the frequently asked questions from the creator of the language.
* [https://www.stroustrup.com/C++11FAQ.html Bjarne Stroustrup C++11 FAQ] — Additional FAQ regarding the recent changes to the C++ language standards.
* [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/c%2b%2b-faq?sort{{=}}votes StackOverflow.com C++ FAQ] — Best answers to the frequently asked C++ questions on the programmers' Q&amp;A website.

===C++ standard documents and drafts===
* [https://open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/ JTC1/SC22/WG21] — The C++ Standards Committee, includes draft C++ language standards, proposals, and defect reports.
** N1146 ([https://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/wp/pdf/nov97-2/ PDF]) — C++98 final working draft.
** N1804 ({{stddoc|n1804|PDF}}) — A working draft in early years (2005-04-27).
** N3337 ({{stddoc|n3337|PDF}}, [https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/n3337/ HTML]) — C++11 first post-publication draft (2012-01-16).
** N4140 ([https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/n4140/draft.pdf PDF], [https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/n4140/ HTML]) — C++14 final working draft (2014-10-07).
** N4659 ({{stddoc|n4659|PDF}}, [https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/n4659/ HTML]) — C++17 final working draft (2017-03-21).
** N4861 ({{stddoc|n4861|PDF}}, [https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/n4861/ HTML]) — C++20 final working draft (2020-04-01).
** N4950 ({{stddoc|n4950|PDF}}, [https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/n4950/ HTML]) — C++23 final working draft (2023-05-10).
** {{uc:{{stdinfo latest draft docnum}}}} ({{stddoc latest draft|PDF}}) — {{stdinfo next version}} latest working draft ({{stdinfo latest draft docdate}}).
* [https://github.com/cplusplus/draft cplusplus/draft] — The official GitHub repository of current draft.
* [https://eel.is/c++draft/ eel.is/c++draft] — HTML version of current draft.

===C++ language and library references===
* [https://stdcxx.apache.org/doc/stdlibref/index.html Apache] — Reference manual for the Apache implementation of the C++ standard library.
* [https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/xl-c-and-cpp-aix/16.1 IBM AIX 16.1] [https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/zos/3.1.0 IBM zOS 3.1.0] — Reference manual for the IBM implementation of C and C++ core languages.
* [https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/xl-c-and-cpp-aix/16.1?topic=reference-standard-c-library-header-files IBM AIX 16.1] — Reference manual for the IBM implementations of the C++ standard library.
* [https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/cpp/cpp-language-reference MSDN] — Reference manual for the Microsoft implementation of the C++ core language.
* [https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/standard-library/cpp-standard-library-reference MSDN] — Reference manual for the Microsoft implementation of the C++ library.
** [https://web.archive.org/web/20120204111500/http://www.dinkumware.com/manuals/default.aspx Dinkumware] — C++ Standard Library implementation that ships with Microsoft Visual C++.
** [https://github.com/microsoft/STL Open STL] — MSVC's implementation of modern C++ Standard Library.
* [https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/libstdc++/index.html GNU libstdc++] — Reference manual for the GNU implementation of the C++ library.
** [https://github.com/gcc-mirror/gcc/tree/master/libstdc%2B%2B-v3 libstdc++-v3] — GNU implementation of the C++ library.
* [https://libcxx.llvm.org/ libc++ documentation] — clang/llvm project's documentation for the implementation of the C++ Standard Library.
** [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/libcxx libc++] — clang/llvm implementation of the C++ Standard Library.
* [https://support.hpe.com/hpesc/public/docDisplay?docLocale=en_US&amp;docId=emr_na-c02133105 HP] — Reference manual for the Dinkumware implementation of the C++ library (as licensed to HP).
* [https://www.nxp.com.cn/docs/en/reference-manual/CWEWLCPPREF.pdf EWL] — Reference manual for the Embedded Warrior implementation of the C++ library.
* [https://cplusplus.com/reference cplusplus.com] — Unofficial C++ standard library reference.
* [https://www.rrsd.com/software_development/stl/stl/index.html SGI STL (hosted on rrsd.com)] — Reference for STL, the 1994 library that introduced many concepts later adopted by the C++ standard library.

===C++ ABIs===
*[https://itanium-cxx-abi.github.io/cxx-abi/ Itanium C++ ABI] — De-facto C++ ABI standard, adopted by
:* [https://github.com/hjl-tools/x86-psABI/wiki/X86-psABI System V ABI].
:* [https://github.com/ARM-software/abi-aa/blob/main/cppabi64/cppabi64.rst ARM C++ ABI].

===Patterns, idioms, tips and tricks===
* [https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines C++ Core Guidelines] — By Bjarne Stroustrup and Herb Sutter.
* [https://cpppatterns.com C++ Patterns] — Modern C++ examples created by the community.
* [https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/More_C%2B%2B_Idioms More C++ Idioms] — At [https://en.wikibooks.org wikibooks.org].
* [https://wiki.c2.com/?CeePlusPlusIdioms CeePlusPlusIdioms] — At c2.com.
* [https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/cpp/welcome-back-to-cpp-modern-cpp Welcome Back to C++] — Learn modern C++ (MSDN).

===Related standards===
* [https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/ JTC1/SC22/WG14] — The C Standards Committee, includes draft C language standards, proposals, and defect reports.
* {{posix}} — The operating system API of the Unix-compatible systems.
* [https://www.unicode.org/versions/latest/ The Unicode Standard] — The universal encoding standard for written characters.

===Might be also useful===
* [https://github.com/tvaneerd/cpp17_in_TTs/blob/master/ALL_IN_ONE.md C++17 in Tony Tables] — New features in C++17 with examples.

{{todo|Maybe add stuff like less formal but influential articles, blogs, sites.}}

===See also===
* [[cpp/links/libs|List of Non-ANSI/ISO C++ libraries]]

{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc see c|c/links|External Links|nomono=true}}
{{dsc end}}

{{langlinks|de|es|fr|it|ja|pt|ru|zh}}