{{title|Filesystem library}}
{{cpp/experimental/fs/navbar}}
{{fmbox|class=noprint|style=font-size: 0.8em|text='''Merged into ISO C++''' The functionality described on this page was merged into the mainline ISO C++ standard as of 3/2016; see [[cpp/filesystem|the filesystem library]] {{mark since c++17}}}}

The Filesystem library, ISO/IEC TS 18822:2015, provides facilities for performing operations on file systems and their components, such as paths, regular files, and directories.

This library is an optional [[cpp/experimental|technical specification]] and may be unavailable if a hierarchical file system is not accessible to the implementation, or if it does not provide the necessary capabilities. Some features may not be available if they are not supported by the underlying file system (e.g. FAT filesystem has no hardlinks, softlinks, and other features).

The behavior is [[cpp/language/ub|undefined]] if the calls to functions in this library introduce a ''file system race'', that is, when multiple threads, processes, or computers interleave access and modification to the same object in a file system.

This library is directly based on [https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/release/libs/filesystem/doc/index.htm boost.filesystem], which is currently available on more compilers and platforms than this experimental technical specification.

====Library-wide definitions====
* ''file'': a file system object that holds data, can be written to, read from, or both. Files have names, attributes, one of which is file type:
:* ''directory'': a file that acts as a container of directory entries, which identify other files (some of which may be other, nested, directories). When discussing a particular file, the directory in which it appears as an entry is its ''parent directory''. The parent directory can be represented by the relative pathname {{c|".."}}.
:* ''hard link'': a directory entry that associates a name with an existing file. If multiple hard links are supported, the file is removed after the last hard link to it is removed.
:* ''symbolic link'': a directory entry that associates a name with a path, which may or may not exist. 
:* ''regular file'': a file that is not one of the other file types.
* ''file name'': a string of characters that names a file. Permissible characters, case sensitivity, maximum length, and the disallowed names are implementation-defined. Names {{c|.}} (dot) and {{c|..}} (dot-dot) have special meaning at library level.
* ''path'': sequence of elements that identifies a file. It begins with an optional {{spar|root-name}} (e.g. {{c|"C:"}} or {{c|"//server"}}), followed by optional {{spar|root-directory}} (e.g. {{c|"/"}} on Unix), followed by a sequence of zero or more file names (all but last of which have to be directories or links to directories). The native format (e.g. which characters are used as separators) and character encoding of the string representation of a path (the ''pathname'') is implementation-defined, this library provides portable representation of paths.
:* ''absolute path'': a path that unambiguously identifies the location of a file.
:* ''canonical path'': an absolute path that includes no symlinks, {{c|"."}} or {{c|".."}} elements.
:* ''relative path'': a path that identifies a file relative to some location on the file system. The special path names {{c|.}} (dot, "current directory") and {{c|..}} (dot-dot, "parent directory") are relative paths.

===Classes===
{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc path}}&lt;!--including swap, hash_value, comparisons, /, &lt;&lt;, &gt;&gt;, and u8path--&gt;
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc filesystem_error}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc directory_entry}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc directory_iterator}}&lt;!--including begin,end--&gt;
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc recursive_directory_iterator}}&lt;!--including begin,end--&gt;
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc file_status}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc space_info}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc file_type}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc perms}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc copy_options}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc directory_options}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc file_time_type}}
{{dsc end}}

===Non-member functions===
{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc absolute}}&lt;!--including system_complete--&gt;
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc canonical}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc copy}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc copy_file}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc copy_symlink}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc create_directory}}&lt;!--including create_directories--&gt;
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc create_hard_link}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc create_symlink}}&lt;!--including create_directory_symlink--&gt;
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc current_path}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc exists}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc equivalent}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc file_size}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc hard_link_count}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc last_write_time}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc permissions}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc read_symlink}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc remove}}&lt;!--including remove_all--&gt;
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc rename}} 
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc resize_file}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc space}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc status}}&lt;!--including symlink_status--&gt;
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc temp_directory_path}}
{{dsc h2|File types}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc is_block_file}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc is_character_file}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc is_directory}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc is_empty}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc is_fifo}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc is_other}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc is_regular_file}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc is_socket}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc is_symlink}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/experimental/fs/dsc status_known}}
{{dsc end}}

===See also===
{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc see cpp|cpp/filesystem|Filesystem library {{mark c++17}}|nomono=true}}
{{dsc end}}

{{langlinks|ar|cs|de|es|fr|it|ja|ko|pl|pt|ru|tr|zh}}