{{cpp/numeric/random/philox_engine/title|philox_engine}}
{{cpp/numeric/random/philox_engine/navbar}}
{{dcl begin}}
{{dcl|num=1|since=c++26|
philox_engine() : philox_engine(default_seed) {}
}}
{{dcl|num=2|since=c++26|
explicit philox_engine( result_type value );
}}
{{dcl|num=3|since=c++26|
template&lt; class SeedSeq &gt;
explicit philox_engine( SeedSeq&amp; seq );
}}
{{dcl|num=4|since=c++26|notes={{mark implicit}}|
philox_engine( const philox_engine&amp; other );
}}
{{dcl end}}

Constructs the pseudo-random number engine.

@1@ The default constructor.
* If the default-constructed engine is of type {{tt|std::philox4x32}}, the 10000th consecutive invocation of it produces the value {{c|1955073260}}.
* If the default-constructed engine is of type {{tt|std::philox4x64}}, the 10000th consecutive invocation of it produces the value {{c|3409172418970261260}}.

@2@ Constructs the engine with a seed value {{c|value}}. The engine's initial {{rlp|/#Generator properties|state}} is determined as follows:&lt;ref name="y"&gt;The buffer {{c|Y}} is intentionally not being set. As {{c|j}} is being set to {{c|n - 1}}, the next state transition always generates new random values and stores them in {{c|Y}}.&lt;/ref&gt;
* All elements of the sequence {{c|X}} are set to zero.
* The first element of the sequence {{c|K}} is set to {{mathjax-or|\(\scriptsize value \mod 2^w \)|value mod 2{{su|p=w}}}}, the remaining elements are set to zero.
* The value of {{c|j}} is set to {{c|n - 1}}.

@3@ Constructs the engine with a seed sequence {{c|seq}}. The engine's initial {{rlp|/#Generator properties|state}} is determined as follows:&lt;ref name="y" /&gt;
* All elements of the sequence {{c|X}} are set to zero.
* Given {{c|(w - 1) / 32 + 1}} as {{c|p}}, the elements of the sequence {{c|K}} are set by the following steps:
# Creates an invented array object {{c|a}} of length {{c|n / 2 * p}}.
# Calls {{c|seq.generate(a + 0, a + n / 2 * p)}}.
# For each integer {{c|k}} in {{range|0|n / 2}}, sets {{mathjax-or|\(\scriptsize K_k \)|K{{su|b=k}}}} to {{mathjax-or|1=\(\scriptsize (\sum^{p-1}_{i=0} a_{k \cdot p+i} \cdot 2^{32i}) \mod 2^w \)|2=(∑{{su|p=p-1|b=i=0}} a{{su|b=k·p+i}}·2{{su|p=32i}}) mod 2{{su|p=w}}}}.
* The value of {{c|j}} is set to {{c|n - 1}}.
@@ {{cpp/enable if|{{tt|SeedSeq}} meets the requirements of {{named req|SeedSequence}}}}.

@4@ The copy constructor. Upon construction, {{c|1=*this == other}} is {{c|true}}.


&lt;references/&gt;

===Parameters===
{{par begin}}
{{par|value|seed value to use in the initialization of the internal state}}
{{par|seq|seed sequence to use in the initialization of the internal state}}
{{par end}}

===Complexity===
@1,2@ Constant.
@3@ Same as the complexity of the {{tt|seq.generate}} call.
@4@ Constant.

===Exceptions===
@3@ If {{tt|SeedSeq}} is not {{lc|std::seed_seq}}, throws the exceptions thrown by the {{tt|seq.generate}} call.

===See also===
{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/numeric/random/engine/dsc seed|philox_engine}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/numeric/random/philox_engine/dsc set_counter}}
{{dsc end}}

{{langlinks|de|es|fr|it|ja|pt|ru|zh}}