{{title|Node handle {{mark c++17}}}}
{{cpp/container/navbar}}

{{dcl begin}}
{{dcla|anchor=no|since=c++17|expos=yes|
template&lt;/* unspecified */&gt;
class /*node-handle*/;
}} 
{{dcl end}}

Associative containers {{lc|std::set}}, {{lc|std::map}}, {{lc|std::multiset}}, {{lc|std::multimap}}, {{lc|std::unordered_set}}, {{lc|std::unordered_map}}, {{lc|std::unordered_multiset}}, {{lc|std::unordered_multimap}} are node-based data structures, and their nodes can be extracted as an object of unspecified type known as ''node handle''.

Node handle is a move-only type that owns and provides access to the element (the {{tt|value_type}}) stored in the node, and provides non-const access to the key part of the element (the {{tt|key_type}}) and the mapped part of the element (the {{tt|mapped_type}}). If the node handle destructs while holding the node, the node is properly destructed using the appropriate allocator for the container. The node handle contains a copy of the container’s allocator. This is necessary so that the node handle can outlive the container.

The exact type of node handle (shown here as {{c/core|/*node-handle*/}}) is unspecified, but each container exposes its node handle type as the member {{tt|node_type}}.

Node handles can be used to transfer ownership of an element between two associative containers with the same key, value, and allocator type (ignoring comparison or hash/equality), without invoking any copy/move operations on the container element (this kind of operation is known as "splicing"). Transfer between unique and non-unique containers is also permitted: a node handle from a {{lc|std::map}} can be inserted into an {{lc|std::multimap}}, but not into {{lc|std::unordered_map}} or {{lc|std::set}}.

A node handle may be empty, in which case it holds no element and no allocator. The default-constructed and moved-from node handle is empty. In addition, an empty node handle can be produced by a failed call to container member function {{tt|extract}}.

Pointers and references to an element that are obtained while it is owned by a node handle are invalidated if the element is successfully inserted into a container.

For all map containers ({{lc|std::map}}, {{lc|std::multimap}}, {{lc|std::unordered_map}}, and {{lc|std::unordered_multimap}}) whose {{tt|key_type}} is {{tt|K}} and {{tt|mapped_type}} is {{tt|T}}, the behavior of operations involving node handles is undefined if a user-defined specialization of {{lc|std::pair}} exists for {{c/core|std::pair&lt;K, T&gt;}} or {{c/core|std::pair&lt;const K, T&gt;}}.

===Member types===
{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc hitem|Type|Definition}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/container/dsc key_type|node_handle}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/container/dsc mapped_type|node_handle}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/container/dsc value_type|node_handle}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/container/dsc allocator_type|node_handle}}
{{dsc expos mem type|container_node_type|private=yes|a container node, the type is unspecified}}
{{dsc expos mem type|ator_traits|id=ator_traits|private=yes|allocator traits of type {{c/core|std::allocator_traits&lt;allocator_type&gt;}}}}
{{dsc end}}

===Data members===
{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc hitem|Member|Definition}}
{{dsc expos mem obj|ptr_|id=ptr|maybe=yes|spec={{cc multi
|typename ator_traits::template
|    rebind_traits&lt;container_node_type&gt;::pointer}}|TODO}}
{{dsc expos mem obj|alloc_|id=alloc|maybe=yes|spec={{c/core|std::optional&lt;allocator_type&gt;}}|TODO}}
{{dsc end}}

===Member functions===
{{member|constructors|2=
{{dcl begin}}
{{dcl|num=1|
constexpr /*node-handle*/() noexcept;
}}
{{dcl|num=2|
/*node-handle*/(/*node-handle*/&amp;&amp; nh) noexcept;
}}
{{dcl end}}
@1@ The default constructor initializes the node handle to the empty state.
@2@ The move constructor takes ownership of the container element from {{c|nh}}, move-constructs the member allocator, and leaves {{c|nh}} in the empty state.

===Parameters===
{{par begin}}
{{par|nh|a node handle with the same type (not necessarily the same container)}}
{{par end}}

===Notes===
Node handles are move-only, the copy constructor is not defined.
}}

{{member|operator{{=}}|2=
{{ddcl|1=
/*node-handle*/&amp; operator=(/*node-handle*/&amp;&amp; nh);
}}
* If the node handle is not empty, 
:* destroys the {{tt|value_type}} subobject in the container element object managed by this node handle by calling {{tt|ator_traits::destroy}};
:* deallocates the container element by calling {{c/core|ator_traits::rebind_traits&lt;/*container-node-type*/&gt;::deallocate}};
* Acquires ownership of the container element from {{c|nh}};
* If node handle was empty (and so did not contain an allocator) or if {{c/core|ator_traits::propagate_on_container_move_assignment}} is {{c|true}}, move-assigns the allocator from {{c|nh}};
* sets {{c|nh}} to the empty state.

The behavior is undefined if the node is not empty and {{c/core|ator_traits::propagate_on_container_move_assignment}} is {{c|false}} and the allocators do not compare equal.

===Parameters===
{{par begin}}
{{par|nh| node handle with the same type (not necessarily the same container)}}
{{par end}}

===Return===
{{c|*this}}

===Exceptions===
Throws nothing.

===Notes===
Node handles are move-only, the copy assignment is not defined.
}}

{{member|destructor|2=
{{ddcl|
~/*node-handle*/();
}}

* If the node handle is not empty, 
:* destroys the {{tt|value_type}} subobject in the container element object managed by this node handle by calling {{c/core|ator_traits::destroy}};
:* deallocates the container element by calling {{c/core|ator_traits::rebind_traits&lt;/*container-node-type*/&gt;::deallocate}}.
}}

{{member|empty|2=
{{ddcl|
bool empty() const noexcept;
}}

Returns {{c|true}} if the node handle is empty, {{c|false}} otherwise.
}}

{{member|operator bool|2=
{{ddcl|
explicit operator bool() const noexcept;
}}

Converts to {{c|false}} if the node handle is empty, {{c|true}} otherwise.
}}

{{member|get_allocator|2=
{{ddcl|
allocator_type get_allocator() const;
}}

Returns a copy of the stored allocator (which is a copy of the allocator of the source container). The behavior is undefined if the node handle is empty.

===Exceptions===
Throws nothing.
}}

{{member|value|2=
{{ddcl|notes={{mark|set containers only}}|
value_type&amp; value() const;
}}

Returns a reference to the {{tt|value_type}} subobject in the container element object managed by this node handle. The behavior is undefined if the node handle is empty.

===Exceptions===
Throws nothing.
}}

{{member|key|2=
{{ddcl|notes={{mark|map containers only}}|
key_type&amp; key() const;
}}

Returns a non-const reference to the {{tt|key_type}} member of the {{tt|value_type}} subobject in the container element object managed by this node handle. The behavior is undefined if the node handle is empty.

===Exceptions===
Throws nothing.

===Notes===
This function makes it possible to modify the key of a node extracted from a map, and then re-insert it into the map, without ever copying or moving the element.
}}

{{member|mapped|2=
{{ddcl|notes={{mark|map containers only}}|
mapped_type&amp; mapped() const;
}}

Returns a reference to the {{tt|mapped_type}} member of the {{tt|value_type}} subobject in the container element object managed by this node handle. The behavior is undefined if the node handle is empty.

===Exceptions===
Throws nothing.
}}

{{member|swap|2=
{{ddcl|
void swap(/*node-handle*/&amp; nh) noexcept(/* see below */);
}}

* swaps ownership of container nodes;
* if one node is empty or if both nodes are non-empty and {{c/core|ator_traits::propagate_on_container_swap}} is {{c|true}}, swaps the allocators as well.

The behavior is undefined if both nodes are not empty and {{c/core|ator_traits::propagate_on_container_swap}} is {{c|false}} and the allocators do not compare equal.

===Exceptions===
{{noexcept|ator_traits::propagate_on_container_swap::value {{!!}}
         ator_traits::is_always_equal::value}}
}}

===Non-member functions===
{{member|swap|2=
{{ddcl|
friend void swap(/*node-handle*/&amp; x, /*node-handle*/&amp; y) noexcept(noexcept(x.swap(y)));
}}

Effectively executes {{c|x.swap(y)}}.

{{cpp/hidden friend|{{tti|node-handle}}}}
}}

{{langlinks|es|ja|zh}}