{{cpp/title|transform_exclusive_scan}}
{{cpp/algorithm/numeric/navbar}}
{{dcl begin}}
{{dcl header|numeric}}
{{dcl|num=1|since=c++17|notes={{mark constexpr since c++20}}|
template&lt; class InputIt, class OutputIt, class T, 
          class BinaryOp, class UnaryOp &gt;
OutputIt transform_exclusive_scan
    ( InputIt first, InputIt last, OutputIt d_first, T init,
      BinaryOp binary_op, UnaryOp unary_op );
}}
{{dcl|since=c++17|num=2|1=
template&lt; class ExecutionPolicy,
          class ForwardIt1, class ForwardIt2, class T,
          class BinaryOp, class UnaryOp &gt;
ForwardIt2 transform_exclusive_scan
    ( ExecutionPolicy&amp;&amp; policy,
      ForwardIt1 first, ForwardIt1 last, ForwardIt2 d_first, T init,
      BinaryOp binary_op, UnaryOp unary_op );
}}
{{dcl end}}

@1@ Computes the exclusive prefix sum using {{c|op}}.
@@ For each integer {{c|i}} in {{range|0|std::distance(first, last)}}, performs the following operations in order:
# Creates a sequence which is formed by {{c|init}} followed by the values transformed from the elements of {{range|first|iter}} in order by {{c|unary_op}}, where {{c|iter}} is the next {{c|i}}{{su|b=th}} iterator of {{c|first}}.
# Computes the generalized noncommutative sum of the sequence over {{c|binary_op}}.
# Assigns the result to {{c|*dest}}, where {{c|dest}} is the next {{c|i}}{{su|b=th}} iterator of {{c|d_first}}.

@2@ Same as {{v|1}}, but executed according to {{c|policy}}.
@@ {{cpp/algorithm/parallel overload precondition}}

The ''generalized noncommutative sum'' of a sequence of elements over a binary operation {{c|binary_op}} is defined as follows:
* If the sequence only has one element, the sum is the value of the element.
* Otherwise, performs the following operations in order:
# Selects any two adjacent elements {{c|elem1}} and {{c|elem2}} from the sequence.
# Calculates {{c|binary_op(elem1, elem2)}} and replaces the two elements in the sequence with the result.
# Repeats steps 1 and 2 until there is only one element in the sequence.


The result is non-deterministic if the {{c|binary_op}} is not associative (such as floating-point addition).

If any of the following values is not convertible to {{tt|T}}, the program is ill-formed:
* {{c|binary_op(init, init)}}
* {{c|binary_op(init, unary_op(*first))}}
* {{c|binary_op(unary_op(*first), unary_op(*first))}}

If any of the following conditions is satisfied, the behavior is undefined:
* {{tt|T}} is not {{named req|MoveConstructible}}.
* {{c|unary_op}} or {{c|binary_op}} modifies any element of {{range|first|last}}.
* {{c|unary_op}} or {{c|binary_op}} invalidates any iterator or subrange of {{closed range|first|last}}.

===Parameters===
{{par begin}}
{{par|first, last|the range of elements to sum}}
{{par|d_first|the beginning of the destination range, may be equal to {{c|first}}}}
{{par exec pol}}
{{par|init|the initial value}}
{{par|unary_op|unary {{named req|FunctionObject}} that will be applied to each element of the input range. The return type must be acceptable as input to {{c|binary_op}}.}}
{{par|binary_op|binary {{named req|FunctionObject}} that will be applied in to the result of {{c|unary_op}}, the results of other {{c|binary_op}}, and {{c|init}}.}}
{{par hreq}}
{{par req named|InputIt|InputIterator}}
{{par req named|OutputIt|OutputIterator}}
{{par req named|ForwardIt1, ForwardIt2|ForwardIterator}}
{{par end}}

===Return value===
Iterator to the element past the last element written.

===Complexity===
Given {{mathjax-or|\(\scriptsize N\)|N}} as {{c|std::distance(first, last)}}:
@1,2@ {{mathjax-or|\(\scriptsize O(N)\)|O(N)}} applications of {{c|unary_op}} and {{c|binary_op}} respectively.

===Exceptions===
{{cpp/algorithm/parallel exceptions reporting behavior|singular=yes}}

===Notes===
{{c|unary_op}} is never applied to {{c|init}}.

===Example===
{{cpp/algorithm/transform scan example}}

===See also===
{{dsc begin}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/algorithm/dsc partial_sum}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/algorithm/dsc exclusive_scan}}
{{dsc inc|cpp/algorithm/dsc transform_inclusive_scan}}
{{dsc end}}

{{langlinks|de|es|fr|it|ja|pt|ru|zh}}